src/mte_vatag.adoc, before:

[[virtualtag]]
== Virtually indexed tag storage (Svatag)

Svatag extension defines that tag storage for memory chunks (`mc`) as defined
by Zimte (see <<tagging>>) extension is in virtual address
space of execution environment. Tag storage can be viewed as a large array
(hereafter referred to as virtually indexed tag table or VITT) of the tags
(`mc_tag`) with each tag width = `mc_tag_width` (see
<<tagging>> for `mc_tag` and `mc_tag_width`). Base virtual
address of this large array is determined differently depending on privilege
mode (see <<VIRT_TAG_BASE_CSR>>) and hereafter referred as `__x__VITT_BASE`.

[[VIRT_TAG_LOOKUP]]
=== Tag look up in virtually indexed tag table

Virtual address location (`mc_tag_va`) of `mc_tag` for a given memory chunk
located at virtual address `va` is looked up in VITT using the following
formula

  mc_tag_va = VITT_BASE + BIT_TO_BYTE((va >> 4) * mc_tag_width)

When load/stores are performed on a virtual address `va` with tag checks (see
<<TAG_CHECKS>>) enforced then hart performs tag look up by performing a load
on `mc_tag_va` for the corresponding `va` and extracts `mc_tag` from the loaded
value at the virtual address `mc_tag_va`.

Tag loads as part of tag look up can raise load page fault on `mc_tag_va`, if
it doesn't have read permissions in page tables.

[NOTE]
====
In case of `mc_tag_width` = 4 bit, each single byte in tag storage is packed
with two `mc_tag` for two consecutive memory chunks. Thus extracting a `mc_tag`
requires masking and shifting of bits after the value is loaded from
`mc_tag_va`.
====

When `settag` instruction is executed for memory chunks(s) starting at the
virtual address `va` (see <<TAG_STORE>>) and memory tagging is enabled for
current execution environment, then hart performs tag store by performing
a store on `mc_tag_va` for the corresponding `va`.

Tag stores as part of `settag` can raise store page fault on `mc_tag_va`
address, if it doesn't have write permissions in page tables.

[NOTE]
====
In case of `mc_tag_width` = 4 bit, each single byte in tag storage is packed
with two `mc_tag` for two consecutive memory chunks. Thus storing a `mc_tag`
requires read, modify (masking and shifting of bits) and store back to
`mc_tag_va`.
====

[[VIRT_TAG_BASE_CSR]]
=== Tag table base address CSRs

Tag storage base virtual address (`__x__VITT_BASE`) is defined using privileged
CSRs. Tag table base address must be 4K aligned. Following table list the
privileged CSRs.

.Privileged tag base address CSRs
[width=100%]
[%header, cols="^4,^12"]
|===
|Privilege level | CSR
|  U             | `svittu`
|  S / HS        | `svitts`
|  VS            | `vsvitts`
|  M             | `mvitt`
|===

[[TAG_MEM_PROTECTION]]
=== Protection of tag storage

Hart must raise access faults on regular loads and stores to virtual addresses
spanning VITT range. VITT range is defined as below

  tag_memory_region_start = mc_tag_va(LOWEST_VADDR_CURR_PRIV)
  tag_memory_region_end = mc_tag_va(HIGHEST_VADDR_CURR_PRIV)
  LOWEST_VADDR_CURR_PRIV: Lowest virtual address in current privilege.
  HIGHEST_VADDR_CURR_PRIV: Highest virtual address in current privilege.

.Lowest and highest virtual addresses
[width=100%]
[%header, cols="^4,^12"]
|===
|Privilege level | LOWEST_VADDR_CURR_PRIV | HIGHEST_VADDR_CURR_PRIV
|  U             | 0                      | 2 ^ (VADDR_BITS) - 1
|  S / HS / VS   | 2 ^ (VADDR_BITS)       | 2 ^ (VADDR_BITS) OR (2 ^ (VADDR_BITS) - 1)
|  M             | 0                      | `Impl. defined`
|===

VADDR_BITS is virtual addressing bits. VADDR_BITS can be 39, 48 or 57
depending on Sv39, Sv48 or Sv57 virtual addressing mode in `satp` CSR.

`Svatag` assumes an even split in address space between user and supervisor
with user address space spanning from zero to maxium positive address while
supervisor address space spanning from minimum negative value to maximum
negative value.

Lowest virtual address in M-mode is defined to be 0 and highest virtual address
for M-mode is implementation dependent.

Commit message:

Adding requirement to fault on settag to VITT range
Signed-off-by: Deepak Gupta <debug@rivosinc.com>
Signed-off-by: Siqi <zhaosiqi.zsq@alibaba-inc.com>

src/mte_vatag.adoc, after:

[[virtualtag]]
== Virtually indexed tag storage (Svatag)

Svatag extension defines that tag storage for memory chunks (`mc`) as defined
by Zimte (see <<tagging>>) extension is in virtual address
space of execution environment. Tag storage can be viewed as a large array
(hereafter referred to as virtually indexed tag table or VITT) of the tags
(`mc_tag`) with each tag width = `mc_tag_width` (see
<<tagging>> for `mc_tag` and `mc_tag_width`). Base virtual
address of this large array is determined differently depending on privilege
mode (see <<VIRT_TAG_BASE_CSR>>) and hereafter referred as `__x__VITT_BASE`.

[[VIRT_TAG_LOOKUP]]
=== Tag look up in virtually indexed tag table

Virtual address location (`mc_tag_va`) of `mc_tag` for a given memory chunk
located at virtual address `va` is looked up in VITT using the following
formula

  mc_tag_va = VITT_BASE + BIT_TO_BYTE((va >> 4) * mc_tag_width)

When load/stores are performed on a virtual address `va` with tag checks (see
<<TAG_CHECKS>>) enforced then hart performs tag look up by performing a load
on `mc_tag_va` for the corresponding `va` and extracts `mc_tag` from the loaded
value at the virtual address `mc_tag_va`.

Tag loads as part of tag look up can raise load page fault on `mc_tag_va`, if
it doesn't have read permissions in page tables.

[NOTE]
====
In case of `mc_tag_width` = 4 bit, each single byte in tag storage is packed
with two `mc_tag` for two consecutive memory chunks. Thus extracting a `mc_tag`
requires masking and shifting of bits after the value is loaded from
`mc_tag_va`.
====

When `settag` instruction is executed for memory chunks(s) starting at the
virtual address `va` (see <<TAG_STORE>>) and memory tagging is enabled for
current execution environment, then hart performs tag store by performing
a store on `mc_tag_va` for the corresponding `va`.

Tag stores as part of `settag` can raise store page fault on `mc_tag_va`
address, if it doesn't have write permissions in page tables.

[NOTE]
====
In case of `mc_tag_width` = 4 bit, each single byte in tag storage is packed
with two `mc_tag` for two consecutive memory chunks. Thus storing a `mc_tag`
requires read, modify (masking and shifting of bits) and store back to
`mc_tag_va`.
====

[[VIRT_TAG_BASE_CSR]]
=== Tag table base address CSRs

Tag storage base virtual address (`__x__VITT_BASE`) is defined using privileged
CSRs. Tag table base address must be 4K aligned. Following table list the
privileged CSRs.

.Privileged tag base address CSRs
[width=100%]
[%header, cols="^4,^12"]
|===
|Privilege level | CSR
|  U             | `svittu`
|  S / HS        | `svitts`
|  VS            | `vsvitts`
|  M             | `mvitt`
|===

[[TAG_MEM_PROTECTION]]
=== Protection of tag storage

Hart must raise access faults on regular loads and stores to virtual addresses
spanning VITT range. Hart must also raise access fault on `settag` instruction
if the memory chunk specified in `rs1` overlaps with VITT range. VITT range is
defined as below

  tag_memory_region_start = mc_tag_va(LOWEST_VADDR_CURR_PRIV)
  tag_memory_region_end = mc_tag_va(HIGHEST_VADDR_CURR_PRIV)
  LOWEST_VADDR_CURR_PRIV: Lowest virtual address in current privilege.
  HIGHEST_VADDR_CURR_PRIV: Highest virtual address in current privilege.

.Lowest and highest virtual addresses
[width=100%]
[%header, cols="^4,^12"]
|===
|Privilege level | LOWEST_VADDR_CURR_PRIV | HIGHEST_VADDR_CURR_PRIV
|  U             | 0                      | 2 ^ (VADDR_BITS) - 1
|  S / HS / VS   | 2 ^ (VADDR_BITS)       | 2 ^ (VADDR_BITS) OR (2 ^ (VADDR_BITS) - 1)
|  M             | 0                      | `Impl. defined`
|===

VADDR_BITS is virtual addressing bits. VADDR_BITS can be 39, 48 or 57
depending on Sv39, Sv48 or Sv57 virtual addressing mode in `satp` CSR.

`Svatag` assumes an even split in address space between user and supervisor
with user address space spanning from zero to maxium positive address while
supervisor address space spanning from minimum negative value to maximum
negative value.

Lowest virtual address in M-mode is defined to be 0 and highest virtual address
for M-mode is implementation dependent.
