src/mte_intro.adoc, before:

[[intro]]
== Introduction

Significant production deployed software is written in languages which provide
powerful primitives (like C/C++) to software developers to manage memory.
Software is written in collaborative fashion and on tight deadlines and bugs do
get introduced in software development. Such bugs sometimes can lead to issues
like information disclosures, memory leak or memory corruptions commonly termed
as `memory safety` issues. Underlying cause of memory safety issues can be
anything but eventually such issues surface as invalid memory accesses.

From program's perspective access to memory happens via pointers and life cycle
of pointers in a program is managed by following

* Memory allocator - A memory allocator uses operating system facilities to
  create large memory mappings and expose APIs so that software can manage
  (allocate and free) memory at their convenience. As an example `malloc`
  allocates memory and returns a pointer to allocated memory and `free` frees
  the memory so that allocator can recycle that memory. Once a pointer is
  created inside a function, it can pass around this pointer to other functions
  or libraries and even after memory is freed, passed copies of pointer may
  exist in other software components (due to bug) and if accessed can lead to
  invalid memory access issues.

* Stack - Program starts execution with an allocated stack by underlying
  execution environment which also ensures that stack pointer register is set
  to base of stack memory and compiler derives all memory pointers for stack
  objects (inside a function) from the stack pointer register. Program may be
  written in a way which can pass around stack pointers to other functions. If
  a passed copy of such a stack pointer is saved by another function and can be
  accessed by it, then it may lead to stack invalid memory access issues.

* Globals - Pointers to global memory are valid throughout the runtime of the
  program and thus invalid memory access to global memory is not possible.
  Although if a program is accessing global memory in a way that can lead to
  out of bounds access, that can be leveraged to access address space of the
  program which otherwise wasn’t possible.

Two prominent patterns of invalid memory accesses are following (but not
limited to)

* Stale pointer accesses (temporal): Memory was freed (heap) or became out of
  scope (stack) and due to a bug in software, pointer is still kept around and
  reachable via some control flow. This can be termed as use after free or out
  of scope accesses. With respect to heap memory such issues are commonly
  called `use after free` (UAF). In case of stack, such issues are termed as
  `stack use after return`, `stack use after scope`.

* Incorrect pointer construction (spatial): Due to bug in bounds checking, an
  incorrect pointer can be constructed and thus leading to invalid memory
  access. Similarly due to a bug in arithmetics (integer overflow) or bad
  casting (signed to unsigned), bad offsets can be generated and eventually
  leading to incorrect pointer construction and out of bounds accesses. More
  commonly they are termed `stack` or `heap buffer overflows`.

To catch such inadvertent programming errors, performing memory validity check
at access time is required. When the memory is valid to access (as an example
after allocation in `malloc` or on a function call for stack locals),
software can associate a `tag` value with the memory, store assigned `tag` in a
special memory (tag storage) and annotate that `tag` in high unused bits of the
pointer. This ensures that whenever the pointer is passed around, pointer is
always tagged with `tag` assigned at the time when memory became valid. When
memory is not allowed to be accessible (as an example in when memory is freed
using `free` or stack locals are out of scope after a function has returned)
then software can change assigned `tag` in tag storage. On a memory access (i.e
pointer dereference), `tag` in pointer is checked against stored `tag` for that
memory and if tags do not match then it is due to a memory safety bug in
program.

Existing software mechanisms using compiler assisted software instrumentation
and runtime support exist (address sanitizer aka ASan) cite:[ASAN]. However
software approach has significant cost from performance perspective and are
mostly limited to unit test, developer test or special test harness (like
fuzzing) environments. Hardware assistance in management and checking of `tags`
on memory accesses helps in more scalable testing of software in variety of
deployment scenarios including production.

Leveraging this software usage model, the `Zimte` extension defines a mechanism
for tagged pointer construction, tag management instructions to store tags and
tag checks on memory accesses (pointer dereferences). `Svatag` extension
defines that `tag` is stored in virtual memory along with protection mechanisms
for tag storage.

Commit message:

Code page tag check elision (#35)
* src/mte_intro: introduce checked load/store and non-checked load/store

Signed-off-by: Deepak Gupta <debug@rivosinc.com>

* src/mte_tag: introduce MTAG for code pages

Existing spec uses MTAG data pages and thus if set ld/st are tag checked.
`MTAG` is extended for code pages to opt out from ld/st fetched from
such code pages to generate checked load/store.

Signed-off-by: Deepak Gupta <debug@rivosinc.com>

---------

Signed-off-by: Deepak Gupta <debug@rivosinc.com>

src/mte_intro.adoc, after:

[[intro]]
== Introduction

Significant production deployed software is written in languages which provide
powerful primitives (like C/C++) to software developers to manage memory.
Software is written in collaborative fashion and on tight deadlines and bugs do
get introduced in software development. Such bugs sometimes can lead to issues
like information disclosures, memory leak or memory corruptions commonly termed
as `memory safety` issues. Underlying cause of memory safety issues can be
anything but eventually such issues surface as invalid memory accesses.

From program's perspective access to memory happens via pointers and life cycle
of pointers in a program is managed by following

* Memory allocator - A memory allocator uses operating system facilities to
  create large memory mappings and expose APIs so that software can manage
  (allocate and free) memory at their convenience. As an example `malloc`
  allocates memory and returns a pointer to allocated memory and `free` frees
  the memory so that allocator can recycle that memory. Once a pointer is
  created inside a function, it can pass around this pointer to other functions
  or libraries and even after memory is freed, passed copies of pointer may
  exist in other software components (due to bug) and if accessed can lead to
  invalid memory access issues.

* Stack - Program starts execution with an allocated stack by underlying
  execution environment which also ensures that stack pointer register is set
  to base of stack memory and compiler derives all memory pointers for stack
  objects (inside a function) from the stack pointer register. Program may be
  written in a way which can pass around stack pointers to other functions. If
  a passed copy of such a stack pointer is saved by another function and can be
  accessed by it, then it may lead to stack invalid memory access issues.

* Globals - Pointers to global memory are valid throughout the runtime of the
  program and thus invalid memory access to global memory is not possible.
  Although if a program is accessing global memory in a way that can lead to
  out of bounds access, that can be leveraged to access address space of the
  program which otherwise wasn’t possible.

Two prominent patterns of invalid memory accesses are following (but not
limited to)

* Stale pointer accesses (temporal): Memory was freed (heap) or became out of
  scope (stack) and due to a bug in software, pointer is still kept around and
  reachable via some control flow. This can be termed as use after free or out
  of scope accesses. With respect to heap memory such issues are commonly
  called `use after free` (UAF). In case of stack, such issues are termed as
  `stack use after return`, `stack use after scope`.

* Incorrect pointer construction (spatial): Due to bug in bounds checking, an
  incorrect pointer can be constructed and thus leading to invalid memory
  access. Similarly due to a bug in arithmetics (integer overflow) or bad
  casting (signed to unsigned), bad offsets can be generated and eventually
  leading to incorrect pointer construction and out of bounds accesses. More
  commonly they are termed `stack` or `heap buffer overflows`.

To catch such inadvertent programming errors, performing memory validity check
at access time is required. When the memory is valid to access (as an example
after allocation in `malloc` or on a function call for stack locals),
software can associate a `tag` value with the memory, store assigned `tag` in a
special memory (tag storage) and annotate that `tag` in high unused bits of the
pointer. This ensures that whenever the pointer is passed around, pointer is
always tagged with `tag` assigned at the time when memory became valid. When
memory is not allowed to be accessible (as an example in when memory is freed
using `free` or stack locals are out of scope after a function has returned)
then software can change assigned `tag` in tag storage. On a memory access (i.e
pointer dereference), `tag` in pointer is checked against stored `tag` for that
memory and if tags do not match then it is due to a memory safety bug in
program. For rest of the document such memory accesses shall be referred to as
`checked memory accesses` or `checked loads and stores`. Memory accesses or loads
and stores not subject to tag checks shall be referred to as `unchecked memory
accesses` or `unchecked loads and stores`.

Existing software mechanisms using compiler assisted software instrumentation
and runtime support exist (address sanitizer aka ASan) cite:[ASAN]. However
software approach has significant cost from performance perspective and are
mostly limited to unit test, developer test or special test harness (like
fuzzing) environments. Hardware assistance in management and checking of `tags`
on memory accesses helps in more scalable testing of software in variety of
deployment scenarios including production.

Leveraging this software usage model, the `Zimte` extension defines a mechanism
for tagged pointer construction, tag management instructions to store tags and
tag checks on memory accesses (pointer dereferences). `Svatag` extension
defines that `tag` is stored in virtual memory along with protection mechanisms
for tag storage.
